---
title: Git 101
---

Welcome to Git 101! This pico-course is going to take you from zero-to-hero with
one of the greatest technologies of the last 20 years. We'll explore a brief
history of Version Control, look at all the Git essentials, and finally, you'll
learn a practical Git workflow to immediately improve your quality-of-life.
If you feel like you've wandered here in error, note that Zoology 319:
*Searching for Sasquatch* has been moved down the hall to room 210.

### Why is This Course Needed?

[Git](https://git-scm.com/) is an awesome technology that has become the
de-facto standard for version control in the software development industry.
It is also a technology that most people never properly learn. Few University
Computer Science programs cover it, and most new graduates and junior developers
will teach themselves Git or other version control software as needed. You will
be hard pressed finding a development job today that doesn't require you to
learn and use Git in some manor, and I'd argue that it's impossible to find a
development job worth keeping if they don't use some kind of version control
(and yes, they do exist).

Git is an essential tool of the modern developer. A tool they will use as often
as a good text editor or noise-canceling headphones in an open office. Yet it
remains a tool that is often brought up as an afterthought in a developer
interview. Git is to developers what a good hammer is to a carpenter. Can you
drive a nail into a board without it? Sure. But you sure as hell wouldn't want
to.

## What is Version Control?

I'm not going to give you a history less on Version Control. If you want that,
just check out the
[Wikipedia article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Version_control).

Here's a Tl;DR of that page: Version control is an essential component of software
development that tracks changes to source code files over the life of a project.
As the name implies, version control software lets you keep different versions
of the same source code files and permanently track changes to those files.
It allows you to easily deploy an application to different environments (like
testing or production) and it allows erroneous updates to be gracefully rolled
back if needed. Perhaps most importantly, modern VCS (Version Control Systems)
allow multiple people to independently contribute to a project in a (mostly)
headache-free way.

## Git: A Brief history

Git was first released on April 7, 2005, following an incident with the source
control management (SCM) software BitKeeper and Linux Kernel development.
[Linus Torvalds](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linus_Torvalds), perhaps best
known for [developing a little OS (Kernel) named Linux](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!msg/comp.os.minix/dlNtH7RRrGA/SwRavCzVE7gJ),
created Git as a result of BitKeeper demoving free use of their product. Failing
to find a free product that worked similar to BitKeeper and met the requirements
for developing the Linux Kernel, Torvalds decided to create his own SCM software,
and Git was born.

The primary design goals for Git was something that:
* Ran stupidly fast, due to the demanding nature of patching the Linux Kernel.
* Prevented data corruption.
* Allowed for distributed workflows.

Within a couple of weeks Torvalds had managed to achieve all of this, and
version control as we know it was changed forever. Git was 100% free software,
arguably better than everything else on the market, and was compatible with
existing SCM workflows.

## Git Basics

### Before we Begin
#### Visualizing Git
It's best to image a Git repository like a tree. It starts growing from the
ground up. When a tree is new, it might only consist of a single branch (AKA
the trunk). The oldest bits of the tree will be near the base of the tree, and
the newest bits will be at the top. Over time, the tree will grow. It will
grow taller. It will grow branches. Those branches will grow branches.
When trying to understand how a Git repository is laid out, always imagine
an image of a tree, where the oldest stuff is at the bottom, and the newest
stuff is spread far out on branches or at the very top.

#### Terminology
I'm going to throw around a lot of terminology in this course, and some of it is
not going to be explained in detail. If a term confuses you, just look it up on
Google. At some point I might add a  proper glossary. Until then, here's a few
important definitions. Also check out the official
[Git Glossary](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitglossary).
* repository (repo) - A directory that contains all the files associated with a
particular Git project.

**Disclaimer**: All of the Git commands we're going to learn today are for the
command-line. By nature, Git works best via a command-line interface. Although
there are many awesome GUI tools for working with git, it is essential to learn
the basics via the command-line. This guide assumes that you know how to do
basic operations from the command line in a Unix-like environment.

There are a couple of *basic Git commands* you must know in order to
effectively use the tool. While the total number of git commands and options
far exceeds the basics, knowing these will allow you to do most things you will
ever need to.

**The big five** `clone` `pull` `push` `add` `commit`. Learn these and you
can start working with git. Of *the big five*, none is more important than the
others, because you need all of them in order for Git to work.

**The essential two:** `status` `log`. While knowing *the big five* commands above
is the bare minimum to get you started with Git, you'll also want to learn these
*essential two* commands.

Before we dig into the commands, let's look at a simple workflow for working on
a software project. Let's imagine you are working on a simple application and
the source code is hosted on a server managed by your operations team. You need
to make a copy of that source code on your local development machine, make a
change to a file, and then upload that file to the server.

### The Big Five

0) Make sure git is installed on your machine, and make sure you have done the
[first-time setup](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-First-Time-Git-Setup)
by setting your Username and Email:
    * `$ git config --global user.name "<Your Name>"`
    * `$ git config --global user.email <Your Email>`

1) Use the `clone` command to copy the source code onto your machine.
    * Change into the directory you want to work in (eg ~/Projects)
    * Copy the source code with: `$ git clone <URL-of-remote-git-repository>`
      * :warning: A git repository URL will end in `.git`.
    * This will copy the entire source code repository onto your local machine
    in the location you specified above. (eg ~/Projects/repo-name)
      * Not only does this copy the source code files, but it copies every
      branch and the history of every file to your computer.
      * By default, you will be viewing the `master` branch. We'll look at what
      a branch is more in the next section.

2) Great, now you've got the source code, edited the file you needed to, and
you're ready to send that change back to the remote server. First, you'll need
to `commit` your changes.
    * Before you can `commit` your changes, you need to `add` them. These two
    commands go together like peanut-butter and jelly.
    * Use the `add` command to add all files you have created or modified to the
    staging area.
      * `$ git add <list-files-delimited-by-spaces>`
      * You can also use a catch-all like `git add *`
    * Use the `commit` command to record your change in the Git repository. No
    change you make is recorded in the Git history until you make a commit.
      * `$ git commit`
        * :warning: You have to create a message for every commit you make. Just
        typing `git commit` will open up your default text editor for you to
        write a commit message.
        * You can short-hand this by using the `-m` flag.
          * `$ git commit -m "A commit message"`
            * This is useful but it is good practice to write proper commit
            messages. A proper commit message will have a single line of
            72 characters or less that summarizes the changes. Below that,
            you can write a more detailed explanation of what the changes in
            the commit do. It's also good practice to write commit messages
            in the imperative form (eg "Fix Bug" not "Fixed a Bug").
              * Here's an example:
              ```
              Update database references

              We've decided to switch from SQLite to MySQL for our web application.
              This commit changes all of the variable references from the SQLite DB
              to the new MySQL DB.
              ```

3) Okay, you've got your changes made and committed. Congratulations - only you
can see those changes on your local machine. You need to `push` these changes
to the remote server.
    * Use the `push` command to publish your changes on the remote server.
      *
    * `$ git push <Remote-repository-name> <Branch-name>`
      * For this example, you can use something like: `$ git push origin master`
        * The remote repository is named `origin` by default.
        * We haven't yet taught you about branching, so you'll likely still
        be on the `master` branch.
    * Your changes are now live on the remote server! :tada:

4) Now, let's imagine another developer has been making changes and you want to
update your local copy of the source code with those changes. You could blow
away the entire directory and re-clone it, but that seems like a lot of work and
wasted bandwidth. Let's use the `pull` command instead.
    * Run: `$ git pull`
    * This will `fetch` those changes from the remote server and `merge`
    those changes with your local copy. What's this? `fetch` and `merge`? You
    told me there were only five commands I had to know?! Well, we're doing a
    little bit of *git magic* here. The `pull` command is actually equivalent
    to running both `git fetch` followed immediately by `git merge <Fetch-head>`
      * Ulimately, you'll want to learn both `git fetch` and `git merge` on their
      own. For now, just knowing `git pull` will let you get by.

:tada: Congratulations! With these five commands, you can *start* working with
Git. Let's go home and have some beer :beer:, right? Wrong! There's a lot more to Git than just pulls, commits, and pushes.

In particular, there are two commands you will find *essential* when using git.

### The Essential Two

The commands I outlined above will let you start working with git, but they
sure don't provide a lot of information. While the following two commands are not
*technically* required to use Git, they are all but *essential* for using Git
effectively. Trying to do anything without them would be like trying to
perfectly mount a frame on a wall without a level.

* `git status` - The status command, exactly as you would imagine, tells you
the status of your current working tree.
  * It tells you what files have been created or modified.
  * It tells you if new/modified files have already been added to the current
  working index with `git add`.
  * It tells you what branch you are working on.
  * It tells you if your current working branch is "ahead" or "behind"
  the branch you started from.

* `git log` - The git log command prints out a log (history) of all commits
made in a repository.
  * At a glance, this lets you take a brief but detailed look at the changes
  to a project over time.
  * By default, git log will print a little basic information about
  each commit in reverse chronological order (most recent changes are listed
  first). Each bit of information contains:
    * The commit hash (A SHA-1 checksum, a 40-digit hexadecimal string you can
      use to uniquely identify a particular commit).
    * The commit author.
    * The commit date.
    * The commit summary.

## Beyond the Basics

Each of the commands I outlined above has about a million options. It would be
well worth your time to check out the
[official documentation](https://git-scm.com/docs) or to read some more advanced
tutorials. I will give a couple of examples of "advanced" commands in this Course,
but this is *Git 101* after all. Maybe some day I'll be able to make a *Git 201*
. :smile:

### Branches

Remember how I told you to visualize a Git repository as a tree? What kind of
tree doesn't have branches? Branches are an essential part of Git or any modern
version control system and Git's branching model is particularly awesome.

In practice, you don't want to be making your changes directly to the `master`
branch of a repository. Let's look at some commands to help you create your own
branch or work with branches other than `master`.

* `branch`
  * Use the `branch` command to list, create, or delete branches.
  * `$ git branch` - This command with no flags will list all branches you have
  on your local machine, and designates your current working branch with an
  asterisk (\*).
  * `$ git branch -r` The -r flag shows all branches in the remote repository.
  * `$ git branch <New-Branch-Name>` will create a new branch based off of your
  current working branch.

* `checkout`
  * Use the `checkout` command to switch between branches.
  * `$ git checkout <Branch-name>` immediately switches you to the desired branch.
  * `$ git checkout -b <New-Branch-Name>` will create a new branch and switch to it.

* `merge`
  * When working between multiple branches, at some point you will probably copy
  the changes from one branch into another. You can accomplish this with the
  `merge` command.
  * `$ git merge <Branch-name>` will merge the branch (Branch-name) into your
  *current* branch. This is best explained with an example:
    * Let's imagine that you have been working on a branch named "fix-bug" and
    you are ready to merge your changes back into the master branch.
    * The "tree" might look like this, where each letter is a commit:
    ```
          E---F---G    <-- fix-bug
         /
    A---B---C---D      <-- master
    ```
    * To merge the `fix-bug` branch into `master`, first, checkout the `master`
    branch with `$ git checkout master` and then merge with `git merge fix-bug`.
    * If all goes well, the changes you made in `fix-bug` will now appear in
    `master` and the "tree" will look like this:
    ```
          E---F---G     <-- fix-bug
         /         \
    A---B---C---D---H   <-- master
    ```
      * It is important to note that the `fix-bug` branch still exists, and you
      can still work on it independently from `master` or any other branches
      if you want to.

#### Solving a Merge Conflict
Inevitably you're going to try to merge two branches together and see the
dreaded words: "merge conflict." The reality is, to a newcomer this sounds a lot
scarier than it is.

What is a merge conflict? A merge conflict occurs when git unable to
automatically merge two files together. This typically occurs when a particular
line or a file has been changed in two different branches. Git is unsure of which
change you want to keep, so you will have to decide which change stays and which
change gets deleted.

### A Few More Things...

* rebase, stash
* View changes with git diff
* .gitignore
* working with tags?

## Practical Git Workflow



P.S. This is part of a [week-long miniseries on Git](/_posts/2018-04-07-git-week.md).
Make sure to check out the other articles!
